{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 TimesNewRomanPSMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1150\margr1150\margb1150\margt1150\vieww12000\viewh14580\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa180\qj

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Potato, Spinach and Chive Frittata\
By Lucy Waverman\
A frittata is a flat omelette. Serve either hot or cold, cut in wedges. You can vary the fillings\'97try leek and bacon, smoked salmon and chives\'97but the method stays the same. Use your largest skillet. Smaller ones work, but the mixture takes longer to cook.\
1 tbsp (15 mL) vegetable oil\uc0\u8232 2 tbsp (25 mL) butter\u8232 2 potatoes, peeled and cubed\u8232 1 tbsp (15 mL) chopped fresh rosemary or 1 tsp (5 mL) dried\u8232 1 bunch spinach\u8232 10 eggs\u8232 \'bc cup (50 mL) whipping cream\u8232 \'bd cup (125 mL) grated Gruy\'e8re cheese\u8232 \'bd cup (125 mL) chopped chives\u8232 Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste\
In a 10-inch (25 cm) skillet on medium-high heat, heat oil and 1 tbsp (15 mL) butter. Add potatoes and saut\'e9 until brown and tender, about 8\'9610 minutes. Sprinkle with rosemary, season with salt and pepper and reserve. Wipe out skillet.\
Meanwhile, wash and stem spinach. Place in a saucepan on medium-high heat. Cover and steam until spinach is tender, about 2 minutes. Place spinach in colander, cool slightly then squeeze out all excess water. Chop.\
Place skillet on medium-low heat, and add remaining butter. When melted, add egg mixture. Cook slowly until bottom is set, stirring occasionally, about 10 minutes. The top will be slightly liquid.\
Place skillet under preheated broiler and broil until top is just set. Turn out onto serving platter and cut in wedges. Garnish with chive flowers, if available.\
Source: Food & Drink Magazine\
http://foodanddrink.ca/lcbo-ear/RecipeController?language=EN&recipeType=1&action=recipe&recipeID=5835\
}